---
layout: post
category: research
title: "Optical line spectra of tidal disruption events from reprocessing in optically thick outflows"
subTitle: "Parkinson, Edward J.;  Knigge, Christian;  Matthews, James H.; Long, Knox S.; Higginbottom, Nick;  Sim, Stuart A.; Mangham, Samuel W."
weblink: https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022MNRAS.510.5426P/abstract
extra: 2022, MNRAS, 510, 5426
---

#### Abstract

A significant number of tidal disruption events (TDEs) radiate primarily at optical and ultraviolet (UV) wavelengths, with only weak soft X-ray components. One model for this optical excess proposes that thermal X-ray emission from a compact accretion disc is reprocessed to longer wavelengths by an optically thick envelope. Here, we explore this reprocessing scenario in the context of an optically thick accretion disc wind. Using a state-of-the-art Monte Carlo radiative transfer and ionization code, we produce synthetic UV and optical spectra for wind and disc-hosting TDEs. Our models are inspired by observations, spanning a realistic range of accretion rates and wind kinematics. We find that such outflows can efficiently reprocess the disc emission and produce the broad Balmer and helium recombination features commonly seen in TDEs. The emission lines feature an asymmetric red wing, with electron scattering having a dramatic influence on their profiles. Moreover, the characteristic colour temperature of the reprocessed spectral energy distribution (SED) is much lower than that of the accretion disc. We show explicitly how changes in black hole mass, accretion rate and wind properties affect the observed broadband SED and line spectrum. In general, slower, denser winds tend to reprocess more radiation and produce stronger Balmer emission. Most of the outflows we consider are too highly ionized to produce UV absorption features, but this is sensitive to the input SED. For example, truncating the inner disc at just 4 ~ ISCO lowers the wind ionization state sufficiently to produce UV absorption features for sight lines looking into the wind.




#### Keywords

accretion, accretion discs – black hole physics – galaxies: nuclei
