---
layout: post
category: research
title: "Accretion disc winds in tidal disruption events: ultraviolet spectral lines as orientation indicators"
subTitle: "Parkinson, Edward J.;  Knigge, Christian;  Long, Knox S.;  Matthews, James H.;
Higginbottom, Nick;  Sim, Stuart A.; Hewitt, Henrietta A.; 2020, MNRAS, 494, 4914"
weblink: https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020MNRAS.494.4914P/abstract
extra: "View on NASA ADS"
---

#### Abstract

Some tidal disruption events (TDEs) exhibit blueshifted broad absorption lines
(BALs) in their rest-frame ultraviolet (UV) spectra, while others display broad
emission lines (BELs). Similar phenomenology is observed in quasars and accreting
white dwarfs, where it can be interpreted as an orientation effect associated with
line formation in an accretion disc wind. We propose and explore a similar unification
scheme for TDEs. We present synthetic UV spectra for disc and wind-hosting TDEs,
produced by a state-of-the-art Monte Carlo ionization and radiative transfer code.
Our models cover a wide range of disc wind geometries and kinematics. Such winds
naturally reproduce both BALs and BELs. In general, sightlines looking into the
wind cone preferentially produce BALs, while other orientations preferentially
produce BELs. We also study the effect of wind clumping and CNO-processed abundances
on the observed spectra. Clumpy winds tend to produce stronger UV emission and
absorption lines, because clumping increases both the emission measure and the
abundances of the relevant ionic species, the latter by reducing the ionization
state of the outflow. The main effect of adopting CNO-processed abundances is a
weakening of C IV 1550 Å and an enhancement of N V 1240 Å in the spectra. We
conclude that line formation in an accretion disc wind is a promising mechanism
for explaining the diverse UV spectra of TDEs. If this is correct, the relative
number of BAL and BEL TDEs can be used to estimate the covering factor of the
outflow. The models in this work are publicly available online and upon request.




#### Keywords

accretion, accretion discs – black hole physics – galaxies: nuclei
